# Hormonal and Pharmacological Mechanisms Affecting Lymphocytes

Several mechanistic insights might explain a persistently low lymphocyte
percentage after finasteride:

## Glucocorticoid Metabolism

5α-reductase isn’t specific to sex hormones – it also helps metabolize
glucocorticoids (e.g. cortisol) into inactive forms. Finasteride’s inhibition of
5α-R could reduce cortisol breakdown. In fact, studies suggest that
finasteride/dutasteride reduce glucocorticoid clearance, effectively increasing
cortisol activity in the body. Elevated cortisol (even moderately) can cause a
well-known hematological effect: relative lymphopenia with neutrophil dominance.
Cortisol and other stress steroids cause lymphocyte apoptosis or redistribution
out of blood and simultaneously demarginate neutrophils into circulation. Thus,
if finasteride led to a chronic uptick in cortisol levels or signaling (even
after drug cessation, if some endocrine feedback was altered), the patient’s
neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) might remain skewed. (A high NLR is a
general marker of systemic inflammation or stress.) In practical terms, this
could manifest as a persistently low relative lymphocyte percentage (with
higher relative neutrophils).

## Androgen/Estrogen Imbalance

Finasteride causes a rise in testosterone (since less is converted to DHT) and a
possible mild increase in estradiol via peripheral conversion. Estradiol and
androgens have complex immunomodulatory roles. Estradiol can be
immunostimulatory at low levels but anti-inflammatory at high levels, while
androgens (like testosterone/DHT) generally tend to dampen certain immune
responses. The net effect of finasteride’s hormonal shift on immune cell counts
is not fully charted. However, one hypothesis is that by removing DHT’s
influence, finasteride might have unleashed an unchecked immune mechanism in
some individuals – possibly even an autoimmune reaction targeting
androgen-sensitive tissues. If an autoimmune process were triggered (as some
researchers speculate in PFS), chronic immune activation could lead to
lymphocyte redistribution or exhaustion over time.

## Neurosteroid Deficiency and Chronic Inflammation

Finasteride significantly lowers levels of allopregnanolone, a neurosteroid
derived from progesterone via 5α-reduction. Allopregnanolone has potent
anti-anxiety and anti-inflammatory effects in the central nervous system. Rat
studies show that after finasteride withdrawal, allopregnanolone remains low for
weeks, coinciding with elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines like IL-1β and TNF-α
in the gut and brain. This suggests a state of chronic inflammation following
finasteride exposure, due to loss of anti-inflammatory neurosteroids. In a
human, chronic neuroinflammation or gut inflammation could activate the immune
system persistently. Chronic inflammation often leads to increased innate immune
cells (neutrophils, monocytes) and relative reduction in lymphocytes in blood –
again raising the NLR and lowering lymphocyte percentage. The patient’s ongoing
depression itself might be both a result of neurosteroid loss and a contributor
to inflammation (depression has been linked to a pro-inflammatory state in some
cases).
